All right so let's walk through some examples
in code now what we've talked about in the previous video.
We'll start off by looking at static variables
or class fields and comparing them to instance variables.
So we need a new class created in our Objects project
called StaticFieldSamples.
(keyboard clacking)
Okay, so there's the code.
This code's showing both a static and non-static field
and the different ways to refer to these fields.
So we can see initially we've declared
a new class here, SuperClass, and that's defined up here.
You can that in that SuperClass, we've got
a static field, name
and also an instance sub-variable, instanceName.
We've got a constructor there that is showing you
a couple of ways to refer to variables.
Using SuperClass.name equals name,
that's referring to a static field
using a class name with a dot operator.
And also showing you that the non-static field
using this reference with dot operator,
and I'm sure you seen that before,
this.instanceName equals instanceName
for resetting the value passed to this constructor.
We're also using that in the toString.
Then in our StaticFieldSamples class, there,
we've got a main method,
instantiating the SuperClass a number of times,
passing various arguments, and then printing out the values.
So let's actually run this.
Okay, you can see the output down at the bottom.
Basically, you can see that the static field name
resides on the class and each instance created
is resetting the same variable.
The instanceName field, on the other hand,
is unique to each instance,
and each object has its own value for the field,
which is unique to that instance.
No real surprises there.
All right, let's now look at final fields.
So we're gonna create a new class for this
We'll call it FinalFields.
(keyboard clacking)
All right, so looking at the code here,
we've got a Constants class, as you can see there,
and that's got three static fields, ONE, TWO and THREE.
The final static fields are initialised
either in the declaration, and you can see
that's the case for ONE and TWO,
or in the static initializer,
as is the case for the variable
with the name of THREE there.
Let's move on down, and also I've got a FinalFields class.
So the FinalFields class has two regular fields,
not static ones.
So these types of fields must be initialised either in
the declaration or in an initializer or a constructor.
So you can see that we're initialising FOUR there
on line 32 in the initializer block,
and we're initialising FIVE in the constructor.
So if you run this.
And you can see the values in the output pane.
So let's mix this up a little bit now.
What I'm gonna do is add another constructor
to the FinalFields class.
And I'm gonna add that just before the main method,
after the no-arguments constructor on line 38.
And you can see that we're also initialising
the variable FIVE in that constructor, as well.
The same that we're doing in the constructor
with no arguments on line 38.
Before we run it, let's just add some output
to make sure that it is working.
I'll add that right at the bottom of our main method.
Run this code.
And you can see that we've got our instance
down at the bottom there, final field FOUR
and final field FIVE with the values four and six.
Basically, you can see that the second object
executed the constructor that took a parameter,
and we were able to set the final field value,
in this case, to six, based on what was called on line 57.
And obviously, equates to that constructor,
which sets our variable FIVE to that value.
All right, that said, what actually happens
if we don't set the final variable FIVE
in the second constructor.
We know that it's already defined on line 39
in the no-arguments constructor.
So if I comment that line 44 out,
you can see that we've got an error.
Come over here and click on that
and the error is now,
"Variable 'FIVE' might not have been initialised."
And that's because all constructors must initialise
a final non-static field if you're not going to
initialise the field in the declaration,
and they haven't initialised it in an initializer.
And obviously, in this case, we haven't done that.
So I'm going to undo that change again,
to make the code valid again.
Now, the other thing I wanna show you is
that you cannot set the value in the initializer
and the constructor.
If you do that, you'll actually get an error.
So if I go back to our initializer up here,
and I attempt to initialise the variable,
paste the code in there.
And there's the code, and it's obviously valid
in the initializer,
but here now, in the constructor, we've got
"Variable 'FIVE' might already have been assigned to."
And you can see it's also the case in the other constructor.
And even if I commented out one of those constructors,
obviously we still have a valid problem
in the other constructor.
So if I come back up here now, and just comment out
the change that I added to our initializer block,
the code's now valid.
And we'll run again.
All right, there you go.
All right, so this video we discussed Access fields,
static, instance, final or not,
both within a class that defines the fields optionally,
using the this qualifier, and outside,
using the reference name with the dot operator.
The fields are accessible outside the class
because of their access modifier,
which we're gonna review in a video coming up.
Now we haven't discussed transient or volatile fields,
except to know their meaning
and that they are valid modifiers.
All right, so moving forward,
we've got a quiz coming up next, good luck.
And then after that I'll see you
and we'll start talking about methods.